Expand buildpack author concepts pages (#739)
buildpacks/docs: content/docs/for-buildpack-authors/concepts/build-plan.md

weight=99
+++

A **build plan** is a `toml` file is the output of the [detect](https://buildpacks.io/docs/for-buildpack-authors/concepts/lifecycle-phases/#phase-2-detect) phase, in which each image extension or component buildpack may express the dependencies it requires and the dependencies it provides.

> 

Reviewer: We probably need to describe here that the build plan is used to figure out the order of the buildpacks in the build phase.  As an example, a `maven` buildpack that detects a `pom.xml` could _require_ that a `"jdk"` is provided.  The `provides` are specified by individual buildpacks.  That is to say, if I wrote a buildpack that installs a `NodeJS` runtime then it would label the provider as `"node"`, or `"nodejs"` or some other string.  To `require` that buildpack you would have to read the documentation to find our what string is uses as a label for the provider.

Author: Isn't this already added under https://buildpacks.io/docs/for-buildpack-authors/how-to/write-buildpacks/use-build-plan/?

Author: Who decides this? We need to discuss this in more details. @natalieparellano

Reviewer: That makes sense to me.

Reviewer 2: We will solve this problem by linking

Author: linked the two pages

<!--more-->

## Example Build Plan (TOML)

In order to make contributions to the Build Plan, a `/bin/detect` executable MUST write entries to `<plan>` in two sections: `requires` and `provides`.

> Additionally, these two sections MAY be repeated together inside of an `or` array at the top-level. Each `requires` and `provides` section MUST be a list of entries formatted as described below:

Reviewer: Do we need to be clear here where the `<plan>` resides?  As a buildpack author I'd expect this to be within the layers that I am creating.

Author: Agree; updated

```toml
[[provides]]
name = "<dependency name>"

[[requires]]
name = "<dependency name>"

[requires.metadata]
# buildpack-specific data

[[or]]

[[or.provides]]
name = "<dependency name>"

[[or.requires]]
name = "<dependency name>"

[or.requires.metadata]
# buildpack-specific data

```  

## Key Points
  
* A valid `build plan` is a plan where all required dependencies are provided in the necessary order, meaning that during the build phase, each component buildpack will have its required dependencies provided by an image extension or component buildpack that runs before it.
* Each pairing of `requires` and `provides` sections (at the top level, or inside of an `or` array) is a potential Build Plan.
* A group will only pass detection, if a valid build plan can be produced from the dependencies that all elements in the group require and provide.
* The `detect` phase could fail, if a buildpack requires a dependency that cannot be resolved.  

> * The resulting `build plan` is passed as one of the inputs to the `build` phase.

Reviewer: This is *great*

weight=99
+++

> A **build plan** is a `toml` file is the output of the [detect](https://buildpacks.io/docs/for-buildpack-authors/concepts/lifecycle-phases/#phase-2-detect) phase, in which each image extension or component buildpack may express the dependencies it requires and the dependencies it provides.

Author: updated

<!--more-->

## Example Build Plan (TOML)

> In order to make contributions to the `Build Plan`, a `/bin/detect` executable MUST write entries to `<plan>` in two sections: `requires` and `provides`. The generated `plan.toml` file is usually added under the `<layers>`directory.

Reviewer 2: We might clarify here, there are actually 3 different things that are relevant to the concept of a build plan:

* the piece of the build plan that is contributed by the buildpack during detect (this is the "build plan" from the buildpack's perspective)
  * this is written to a temporary directory by the buildpack
* the concatenation of all the contributions from all the buildpacks that passed detect (this is the real and true "build plan" from the platform's perspective)
  * this is the file that is usually written to `<layers>` (unless the platform provided another path for it) and the buildpack never has to actually care about it
* the piece of the build plan that is shown to the buildpack during build, containing only the dependencies that the buildpack is responsible for providing - and the buildpack can choose NOT to provide all of these, leaving that work for a future buildpack (this is sometimes referred to as the "buildpack plan")
  * this is written to a temporary directory by the lifecycle

Reviewer: Right...from the buildpack-author perspective there's the stuff I contribute to the build plan during `detect` and then the _weird_ deduplication of the ["buildpackplan"](https://github.com/buildpacks/spec/blob/7207c7dd711e28ddd045e0130e8a96e9200bf079/buildpack.md#buildpack-plan-toml) that I have to perform during the `build` phase.

Author: @natalieparellano we also need to discuss this in more details

Reviewer 2: https://buildpacks.io/docs/for-buildpack-authors/how-to/write-buildpacks/use-build-plan/ could become two pages: "write the build plan" and "read the buildpack plan"

Author: added

The `requires` and `provides` sections MAY be repeated together inside of an `or` array at the top-level.  
Each `requires` and `provides` section MUST be a list of entries formatted as shown below:

```toml
[[provides]]
name = "<dependency name>"

[[requires]]
name = "<dependency name>"

[requires.metadata]
# buildpack-specific data

[[or]]

[[or.provides]]
name = "<dependency name>"

[[or.requires]]
name = "<dependency name>"

[or.requires.metadata]
# buildpack-specific data

```  

## Key Points
  

> * A valid `build plan` is a plan where all required dependencies are provided in the necessary order, meaning that during the build phase, each component buildpack will have its required dependencies provided by an image extension or component buildpack that runs before it.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* A valid `build plan` is a plan where all required dependencies are provided in the necessary order, meaning that during the build phase, each component buildpack will have its required dependencies provided by a component buildpack or image extension that runs before it.
```

> * Each pairing of `requires` and `provides` sections (at the top level, or inside of an `or` array) is a potential Build Plan.

Reviewer 2: We should probably expand a bit on this

Author: This is already explained under https://buildpacks.io/docs/for-buildpack-authors/how-to/write-buildpacks/use-build-plan/#example-jvm-buildpack. I added a link to avoid redundancy.

> * A group will only pass detection, if a valid build plan can be produced from the dependencies that all elements in the group require and provide.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* A group will only pass detection if a valid build plan can be produced from the dependencies that all elements in the group require and provide.
```

Author: updated

> * The `detect` phase could fail, if a buildpack requires a dependency that cannot be resolved.  

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* The `detect` phase could fail if a buildpack requires a dependency that it does not itself provide, or is not provided by another buildpack.  
```

Reviewer 2: Also buildpacks that provide unnecessary dependencies could result in a failure, see https://github.com/buildpacks/lifecycle/issues/1366 for an example error message

Author: updated and added the buildpacks order note

* The `detect` phase could fail if a buildpack requires a dependency that it does not itself provide, or is not provided by another buildpack.
* The `detect` phase could also fail when the buildpacks order is incorrect, i.e, the buildpacks providing dependencies run `after` the buildpacks requiring them.
* The resulting `build plan` is passed as one of the inputs to the `build` phase.

## Resources

> For more about build plans, look at [Use the build plan]( https://buildpacks.io/docs/for-buildpack-authors/how-to/write-buildpacks/use-build-plan/)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
For further examples and guidance on using the build plan, see the [how-to]( https://buildpacks.io/docs/for-buildpack-authors/how-to/write-buildpacks/use-build-plan/) page.
```

Author: updated
